The Project Gutenberg eBook of The O. S. U. Naturalist, vol I., no.
2, December, 1900, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: The O. S. U. Naturalist, vol I., no. 2, December, 1900

Editor: Various

Release Date: April 7, 2023 [eBook #70477]

Language: English

Produced by: Bob Taylor and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
             https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
             generously made available by Biodiversity Heritage
             Library.)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE O. S. U. NATURALIST, VOL
I., NO. 2, DECEMBER, 1900 ***





  Transcriber’s Note
  Italic text displayed as: _italic_
  Bold text displayed as: =bold=




  THE O. S. U.

  Naturalist

  PUBLISHED BY

  THE BIOLOGICAL CLUB OF THE OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY


  EDITORIAL STAFF

  EDITOR-IN-CHIEF—JOHN H. SCHAFFNER, A. M., M. S.


  ASSOCIATE EDITORS:

  _Zoology_—F. L. LANDACRE, B. Sc.

  _Botany_—F. J. TYLER, B. Sc.

  _Geology_—J. A. BOWNOCKER, D. Sc.

  _Archaeology_—W. C. MILLS, B. Sc.

  _Ornithology_—R. F. GRIGGS.


  ADVISORY BOARD:

  PROFESSOR W. A. KELLERMAN, Ph. D.
  Department of Botany.

  PROFESSOR HERBERT OSBORN, M. Sc.
  Department of Zoology.

  PROFESSOR J. A. BOWNOCKER, D. Sc.
  Department of Geology.


  Volume 1.      December, 1900      Number 2


  COLUMBUS, OHIO

  _PRESS OF HANN & ADAIR_




_THE O. S. U. NATURALIST_


A journal devoted more especially to the natural history of Ohio. The
official organ of THE BIOLOGICAL CLUB OF THE OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY.
Published monthly during the academic year, from November to June (8
numbers). Price 50 cents per year, payable in advance. To foreign
countries, 75 cents. Single copies 10 cents.

  JOHN H. SCHAFFNER, _Editor_.
  F. J. TYLER, _Subscriptions_.
  R. F. GRIGGS, _Advertising Agent_.

  _Address_

  THE O. S. U. NATURALIST, Ohio State University,
  COLUMBUS, OHIO.




CONTENTS


  =Feeding Habits of the Scarlet Flamingo=                        =17=
                _J. C. Hambleton_

  =Aggressive Character and Economic Aspect of the White Heath
        Aster=                                                    =19=
                _W. A. Kellerman_

  =Geophilous Plants of Ohio=                                     =21=
                _F. J. Tyler_

  =Notes Economic and Taxonomic on the Saw Brier, Smilax
        Glauca=                                                   =24=
                _W. A. Kellerman._

  =Meetings of the Biological Club=                               =27=

  =News and Notes=                                                =28=


Entered at the Post Office at Columbus, Ohio, as second-class matter,
November 20, 1900.




  The
  O. S. U. Naturalist

  PUBLISHED BY

  THE BIOLOGICAL CLUB OF THE OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY

  Vol. I.       DECEMBER, 1900.       No. 2




FEEDING HABITS OF THE SCARLET FLAMINGO.

J. C. HAMBLETON.


One of the favorite winter haunts of _Phoenicopterus ignipalliatus_
is found on the sandy beaches that abound on the west coast of South
America, at about latitude 42° South.

On the north coast of the large island of Chiloe, there are several
places of this sort where these beautiful birds may be seen in flocks
of hundreds during the months of June, July and August, the winter
months in that region.

I remember the first time I walked over one of their favorite
resorts. It was on the Pudeto river, near the small town of Ancud.
The tides here are rather high owing to the formation of the bay, and
as a consequence it enters the river and floods great stretches of
sand that border the left bank. As the tide goes out the flamingos
may be seen here by hundreds. The first time I visited the place the
tide had been out some hours and there were no birds to be seen. I
was disappointed for the trip had been made for that special purpose.

However my attention was soon attracted to long rows of small
hillocks of sand, or rather, to be more exact, circular ditches in
the sand that appeared to have been made while the water was still
present. These were about two or two and one-half feet in diameter
by five or six inches wide and three or four inches deep. This, of
course, gave the central portion the appearance of a small hill about
eighteen or twenty inches in diameter. Upon inquiry I could get no
information—no one had any idea how or by whom they had been made.

A few days later the mystery was solved when a second visit was made
to the place at a more propitious moment.

Upon approaching to within a few hundred yards of where a regiment of
these scarlet beauties was lined up, the birds took flight and it was
then that I discovered who were the authors of my mysterious little
hills.

By subsequent observations I found that the birds took their stand
in the water when it was about a foot and a half deep, and at more
or less regular intervals about eight or ten feet apart. Here they
remained stationary and turned round and round with their heads under
water, catching the small crustaceans that seem to be their principal
diet. The form of their beak is such that when it is placed on the
ground the upper mandible is underneath. This being large and strong,
soon opens up the circular depression that first called my attention.
Before the tide is all out they usually leave because the crustaceans
have by this time hidden in the sand.

The flamingo frequents this coast only during the winter months and
consequently does not nest here, nor is it known to nest west of the
Andes mountains. Their nests and young, however, have been observed
in great numbers in the small lakes of brackish water that abound
on the plains of Patagonia east of the mountains. Undoubtedly these
are the same birds that spend their winters in Chile, the lofty
Andes proving no barrier to their flight. There are many roads by
which they can pass, the mountains being intercepted by frequent
rivers that empty into the Pacific, and have their origin beyond the
snow-covered Andes, in the plains of the Argentine Republic.




AGGRESSIVE CHARACTER AND ECONOMIC ASPECT OF THE WHITE HEATH ASTER.

W. A. KELLERMAN.

(Plate 3.)


The White Heath Aster (Aster ericoides) is an indigenous species
whose distribution is given in our manuals as “Canada, Florida, and
the Mississippi,” “Maine and Ontario to Florida, west to Wisconsin
and Kentucky,” and “South New England to Minnesota and southward,”
the variety _pilosus_ “mainly in the Western States.” It is one of
the commonest Asters throughout Ohio, occurring doubtless in every
county in our State. The variety _pilosus_ seems to be the common
form in our region, and may be seen growing in rich and poor soil
with almost equal thrift, and occurring in all habitats except the
woods and swamps.

Its capacity for adaptation to the advance of civilization is
remarkable, and this occasions the remark now very generally heard
among the farmers that it is a “new weed in the region,” “not known
here five years ago,” “just came all at once,” “the latest and worst
weed we have,” and other expressions of similar import. As a matter
of fact, the roadsides in many places are lined with it, fields with
a poor stand of clover, timothy, or blue grass are completely covered
with it, and all waste places, vacant lots, and neglected spots are
profusely decorated with the same.

[Illustration:

  _Plate 3._

KELLERMAN ON ASTER.]

The plant is a rather coarse weed; but in spite of this fact it is
somewhat attractive because of the masses of green foliage and the
white flowers that become prominent before the summer is gone, and
last throughout the early and middle autumn. The stems are tough
and wiry and this gives the local name “Steelweed,” a common
designation in Adams County and adjoining regions. It is said by
some, however, that this name is given it “because the flowers are
the color of bright steel.” Another name frequently applied in the
localities mentioned is “Bee-plant” for reasons suggested in the
name itself, and still another is “Stickweed,” for which I could
learn no explanation. Other common names which Britton enumerates
are Frost-weed, Michaelmas Daisy, Farewell Summer, White Rosemary,
Dog-fennel, Mare’s-tail, and Scrub-bush.

Though complaint against this plant is universal in some sections,
it is not, I think, well founded in all cases. It has some merits
now and then acknowledged by those who are close observers. The
allegations pro and con may be summarized as follows:

First, the statement is made that it is “driving out every other
grass” and “invading” the whole country. It is certainly more
abundant than it was before the country was cleared and cultivated;
yet after all but little of it is seen in good pastures and vigorous
meadows, and none at all in ground that is under thorough and
constant cultivation. It has not the aggressiveness possessed by
some of our weeds, but it does quickly take possession of neglected
and fallow ground. It does not spread extensively or rapidly by
underground stems as do some of the Compositae. It has simply short
rootstocks for this purpose. Its mode of multiplication by this
means is illustrated in the figures shown in Plate 3. These are from
photographs taken late in November, and indicate the preparation
the plant makes for the next season’s work. The specimens numbered
1 and 2 had been mowed to the ground during the summer. But this
instead of killing the plants stimulated their propensity to
vegetative multiplication. The result was therefore the opposite of
what the farmer intended. Figure 3 shows a plant undisturbed during
the growing period, and its energies active and latent were almost
entirely exhausted in producing flowers and seed. Let the plants
alone then rather than shear their tops, and the sooner will they
exhaust themselves.

It is true, as the figures plainly suggest, that this Aster is not a
difficult one to eradicate. While the roots are numerous, they are
not long; and even the shallowest plowing or ordinary cultivation
will effectually destroy the plant. As to multiplication by seed
germination, it needs simply to be remembered that good or even fair
cultivation of the soil will prevent this weed from growing, and that
many species of weeds will get in old meadows and pastures as rapidly
as the cultivated grasses are killed by excessive grazing or the
casualties of season and climate.

In the second place the weed is charged with the heinous crime of
“killing stock.” Thorough inquiry in different localities established
the fact that this plant, eaten to considerable extent late in the
season by cattle and horses it is true, does damage perhaps only as
the consumption of an excessive amount of almost any kind of dry and
comparatively innutritious vegetable matter might do. It is said to
be especially binding, and the constipation no doubt was a factor in
bringing about the fatal results that were cited. While stock will
eat the plant when at hand they take but little of it if nutritious
grasses can be found. A very intelligent and observant farmer,
however, was seen cutting and burning the plants which covered his
pastures to save his stock—his neighbor by carelessness in this
respect, he averred, having lost some valuable horses.

On the other hand this White Heath Aster is an important bee-plant.
Bees will “work on it the whole day,” and the plant is in bloom from
middle or late summer to late autumn. The honey made is white, and
has a strong tendency “to turn to sugar.” One farmer who has two
hundred and fifty stands of bees, now that this Bee-plant is well
established as a sure crop, will sow no more buckwheat for his bees.

I have said this species is becoming excessively abundant in some
(hilly) portions of southern Ohio. It can well be regarded as “a
great boon” merely because it is a soil-binder of marked efficiency.
It prevents the destructive washing of the hillsides in the Fall,
open winter and early spring. Such a plant would not be needed to a
great extent, were methods and habits of cultivation perfect or in a
high state of development; but this phase of the economic aspect of
the case must at present be insisted on.

Finally it may be said that as a fertilizer this Steel-weed takes
a high rank. It is regarded by observant farmers as but slightly
inferior to a crop of clover. It does not decompose when turned under
as quickly as clover, but that it yields plant-food and answers
well the mechanical purposes of a coarse fertilizer, testimony is
unanimous and apparently conclusive.

  EXPLANATION OF PLATE 3.—Aster ericoides pilosus, reproduced from
  photographs taken late in November. Figures 1 and 2 show plants
  with abundant, and Figure 3, with few young shoots close to the
  ground. Plants shown in Figures 1 and 2 had the tops removed in
  summer. Figure 3 shows the common appearance at the end of the
  growing season of undisturbed plants.




GEOPHILOUS PLANTS OF OHIO.

F. J. TYLER.


Geophilous—meaning earth loving—is a term which has recently been
applied to such plants as have some special adaption, which enables
them to withdraw beneath the surface of the ground when adverse
conditions, such as extreme heat and drouth, cold, etc., overtake
them. Such adaptions may be classified as

  Rhizomes,
  Bulbs,
  Corms,
  Crowns.

Rhizomes are underground stems and like other stems may be simple
or branched. The branched rhizome is, however, the most common form
since it combines vegetative reproduction with the other advantages
of a rhizome habit. The Brake Fern (Pteris aquilina L.) is an example
of a much branched rhizome and Solomon’s Seal (Polygonatum biflorum
Ell.) of a nearly simple rhizome.

The stem of a rhizomatous plant may remain permanently underground,
as is the case with all ferns except the tree ferns of the tropics.
An annual stem is, however, usually sent to the surface and this
may be a lateral branch from the main subterranean stem or it may
be a continuation of the rhizome, in which case the next year’s
rhizome will be a lateral branch and thus the whole rhizome will be
made up of a number of distinct segments. Various members of the
Iris group are good examples of this. In at least one genus of Ohio
plants—Smilax—there are some members having both a perennial woody
stem and a well developed rhizome. It may be that these plants are
leaving the rhizome habit and are taking up the woody stem habit.

Perhaps in most cases rhizome plants became such through the gradual
covering of trailing stems. It is a protection and a saving of
building material to a plant if its stems are trailing or creeping,
still more so if they are covered by leaf mould or soil. If rhizome
plants were once trailers there should be every gradation between the
two and so we find. The Trailing Wahoo is a good example of this,
since some of its stems are often covered by leaf mould or soil while
others are on the surface or some inches above. Many of the Ericaceæ
are in this transition stage between trailers and geophytes. The
Wintergreen (Gaultheria procumbens L.) has a long, creeping stem
which is often or usually covered by leaf mould. It roots freely and
sends up perennial woody branches to the surface. It is hard to say
in such cases whether the plant is geophilous or not.

Many geophilous plants of the rhizome type were doubtless once
crown formers and here again we find a transition stage which
contains every gradation between the two groups. The Compositæ are
mostly crown formers, but some are true rhizome plants and some are
transitional.

The advantages of a rhizome habit are very apparent. The first and
most important advantage is the protection from frost which this
habit affords. By taking up this habit many plants have been able to
withstand a climate, which would otherwise prove fatal. The Alpine
Willow is an example. Rhizomes are often storehouses for food and
become swollen and distorted in consequence. Vegetative propagation
is usually combined with the geophilous habit and with great
advantage to the plant. In most cases a rhizome dies off at the back
as fast as it grows in front so that any part of it lives a definite
number of years. The individual segments of the Solomon’s Seal, for
instance, live from three to five years. In this way a branch soon
becomes a separate plant. In some cases, however, the rhizome may
live for many years and thus hundreds of seemingly independent plants
may be connected beneath the surface of the ground. The Brake Fern
(Pteris aquilina L.) is of this class and an entire hillside may be
covered with a much branched specimen of this plant.

A plant which has no means of migration when it has exhausted the
nearby food supply is manifestly at a disadvantage when compared with
a progressive rhizome plant which moves every year into a new and
fresh location. To be sure, the distance it travels may not be far
but it is enough to remove the plant from an exhausted position and
from its wornout and useless tissue. Thus this group of plants may be
said to have found the secret of potential immortality, for, unless
some catastrophe overtakes them, they may live indefinitely and
remain young. It is interesting in this connection, to note how far
some of these plants travel in a century. This may be calculated in a
general way by measuring the annual growth in length of the rhizome.
Solomon’s Seal travels from twelve to twenty feet in this length
of time, Uvularia perfoliata L. from eight to ten feet, Onoclea
sensibilis L. from three hundred to five hundred feet, and others
still farther.

The Iris group are exceptions, in that they travel in a circle.
The reason seems to be that the lateral branches which continue
the rhizome from year to year mostly arise on the same side of
the terminal bud, so that each branch goes off at a slight angle
to the former branch. The degree of angle determines the size of
the resulting circle. One class of rhizome plants is very distinct
and requires especial mention. This class may be termed upright or
retrogressive rhizome plants. The upright rhizome may originate from
a progressive rhizome, or from a crown former or in some other
way. Trillium nivale Riddell is in a transitional stage between the
progressive and retrogressive classes, since the large rhizomes
are upright and the young lateral branches are progressive until
they have traveled some distance away from the parent rhizome, when
they too, become upright. The lower Ferns (Ophioglossaceæ) belong
to this class. The disadvantage of this habit is that the rhizome
will soon grow out of the ground and be in a very exposed condition.
To counteract this tendency the roots of these plants are usually
strongly contractile and pull the rhizome down into the ground as
fast as it grows out. Skunk Cabbage (Spathyema foetida (L.) Raf.)
has an upright rhizome and root contraction is very marked. The very
apparent disadvantages of the retrogressive or upright rhizome habit
have made this class very few in number compared with the progressive
rhizome class. In Ohio there are about 475 species of rhizome plants
and less than twenty-five of these belong to the retrogressive class.
This class is closely related to the corm plants, indeed, all that
is needed to make the typical corm out of a retrogressive rhizome
plant, such as Trillium nivale, is to shorten and make more definite
the annual growth of the rhizome. The bulb is usually a very short,
upright rhizome with many thickened scales. The bulb of Lilium
martagon is of this kind but that of Lilium canadense is more closely
related to the progressive rhizomes. The parent bulb sends out one or
more thick rhizomes which grow outward if the bulb is at the normal
depth, downward if the bulb is too near the surface of the ground and
the new bulbs are formed by the shortening of the outer end and the
growth and thickening of the scales of the rhizome.

Both bulbs and corms may be regarded as rhizomes modified to suit
peculiar conditions, such as a long, dry, heated period alternating
with a short, rainy period. A plant to survive under such conditions
must be able to start up very quickly as soon as the rains come,
and flower and mature its seeds before the drouth again overtakes
it. A large amount of food material must be stored up by the plant
in order to do this, and the food material must be kept from drying
or burning up during the heated period. Bulbs and corms, protected
as they usually are by dry and coriaceous coverings, answer these
requirements and are usually abundant in localities where these
conditions obtain. Bulb and corm plants are also well fitted to live
in dense woods where the light is soon shut off in the Spring by
the expanding leaves of the trees. They are able to spring up very
early, flower and ripen seeds before the light is shut off. The food
supply which enables them to do this is often protected by acrid
or poisonous principals developed in the bulb or corm. Pepper-root
(Dentaria laciniata Muhl.) and Jack-in-the-Pulpit (Arisaema
triphyllum [L.] Torr.) are examples.

Crown plants, while not true geophytes, are often closely related
to rhizome plants and may be regarded as transitional. They are
formed by the freezing back of the upright stem to the surface of the
ground, and the survival of the short stem beneath the surface until
the next Spring when it sends out branches from adventitious buds.
In this way several branches are sent up where there was one before,
and, as this crowds and injures the plant, these branches usually
move out some distance from the base of the parent plant before
coming to the surface. The connection with the main stem is often
severed, and thus many new plants are formed. All this rarely takes
place in the Spring but has been shifted back to late Summer or Fall
by the parent plant. Often a food supply is stored up for the young
plants by the parent. Helianthus tuberosus L. is a good example.

Vegetative propagation is brought to its highest development in this
class and they become our worst weeds.




NOTES ECONOMIC AND TAXONOMIC ON THE SAW BRIER, SMILAX GLAUCA.

W. A. KELLERMAN.

(Plate 4.)


In a recent trip through some of the southern counties of the
State my attention was arrested by the enormous quantity of Smilax
glauca—Glaucous-leaf Brier as given by Britton in the Illustrated
Flora—but generally and appropriately called in these regions where
so abundant, the Saw Brier. In the sandy soil of Hocking County,
thence southward to the Ohio River this plant may be seen growing
in field and pasture, by roadside and on hillside, and everywhere
except in wet soils and dense woods. It climbs over fences and high
bushes, displaying its bright foliage of lively green, more effective
by contrast with the abundant white bloom on the under side. In the
Autumn it presents showy wreaths of black but glaucous-coated berries
and the most gorgeous coloration of foliage. The leaves remain for
the most part late in Fall and Winter, and for brilliant and delicate
shades of rose and red are not surpassed by any plant of our entire
flora. The forbidding aspect of the long, wiry stems, with their
bristly covering of long, saw-like or needle-shaped prickles, serves
also to distinguish this plant even among the attractive associates
of its kingdom.

A BAD WEED.—As a weed this species here stands at the head of the
list. Its horrid prickles make it one of the most disagreeable
plants with which to come in contact. It revels in the pastures and
clambers over the fences; it flourishes in the meadows and fields,
and no ordinary practice of crop-cultivation interferes with its
luxuriance. One can readily see that it is not carelessness on the
part of the farmer that suffers half or still larger portions of his
fields to be covered with this pestiferous vine. No other weed is
seen in the area and therefore he has been diligent and careful in
his tillage. The meadows even if twice or thrice mowed in a season
will yet contain year to year the same quantity of Saw Brier. The
stems spring up quickly, and grow “a foot in a night” the people say;
surely the Saw Brier is the freshest plant in the field. In a case
specially noticed a garden spot had been put in cultivation in 1873,
and has been continually and thoroughly cultivated every year since,
yet the Saw Brier is there to-day.

THE UNDERGROUND PARTS.—This tenacity of life and luxuriance of growth
can be understood when the underground parts are examined. There
are numerous irregular and often large tubers or enlargements which
serve as the capacious storehouse of nourishment. They are often of
fantastic shape. Various forms are shown in figure 1, plate 4. These
occur at irregular intervals on the long and tortuous subterranean
stems. It is said that they may be found several feet below the
surface, though the eight specimens shown on the plate were found at
a depth of six to twelve inches. If they all could be removed from
the soil the weed would of course be practically annihilated. But
when found at a depth of several feet—as seen sometimes in making
excavations for foundations, walls, etc.—it is evident that the
farmer will have to make extraordinary and long-continued efforts
to destroy this pest. The less courageous may well be appalled in
contemplating the herculean task. Fortunately swine are fond of the
nutritious tubers, and voraciously devour them when they are given
the freedom of the field and allowed to indulge in their natural
propensities. Heavy coating of manure and winter plowing are also
indicated.

VARIATIONS IN THE LEAVES.—This form is easily recognized among the
several species of Smilax indigenous to Ohio, though the leaves
vary in size and shape to a remarkable degree. A large number of
the common forms are shown in figure 2, plate 4. They are sometimes
very broadly cordate-oval, wider than long; often ovate-cordate,
oval or ovate, lance-oval, oblong to oblong-ovate, broadly to
narrowly lanceolate and even linear; they are mostly cuspidate at
the apex, in some cases tapering to acute or sub-acuminate. The base
is mostly cordate and subcordate, but occasionally tapering. It is
seldom that forms approaching halberd-shape occur in our region. An
inspection of plate 4 will illustrate these several forms. The twig
with fruit marked 6, bears a very common form of the leaf as does
also the one marked 1. The broad-leaf form is not uncommon, but the
very broad-leaf as seen in specimens marked 3 and 5 is of much less
frequent occurrence. The very narrow leaves are as a rule borne on
short stems—such as have developed in fields and meadows where the
earlier stems have been destroyed or disturbed. But often on such
stems (marked 1) the leaves are broad and have the natural shape.

SIZE OF LEAVES.—The size of the leaves is strikingly variable. The
specimens shown on plate 4 being reproduced from photographs exhibit
correctly this variability. Careful measurements also were made of
leaves taken at random from hundreds selected to illustrate this
point. These since they give both the length and width of the leaf
demonstrate the shape as well as the size. The measurements are in
decimeters and one hundred of them are as follows:

  12×11.5     12.5×9.5      8.5×6      9×2      9.5×3.8    7.8×2.2
  11×10.5      12×9.5      7.5×5.5    9×3.5      8×4       7.3×2.8
  12×11        12×11       8.6×5.4    8×1.5     7×2.8       6×1.7
  13×10.6     11×11.8        8×6      6×0.7     8×3.8      5.3×1.6
   11×12      12.2×9.8       9×6      8×1.5     4.5×1       8×3.4
  12.5×11.2   11.5×10       8.5×6     7×1.8     7×2.2      7.5×2.5
  12.2×10     13.5×10.5    8.5×5.8    6.8×2     7×3.2       6×2.5
   12×11      11.5×9.6     9.8×6.4   7.5×2.2   6.2×2.5      6×2.8
   11×11       8×5.5        9×7.3    5.5×2.5   8.2×2.8      6×2.6
  11.5×11.1     9×6        8.3×5.8   7.6×2.2   6.5×2.2      7×2.8
   11×10.8    9.2×6.5       9×6.5     7.8×2    5.5×2.9      8.4×3
   12×11.5     8×5.5       9.9×7.6    6.5×2    7.3×2.7     9.8×3.5
   12×10.6      9×7        8.2×4.6    7×0.8     8×1.8      10×3.5
    13×11     8.5×7.5       8.5×6    8.4×0.7   9.5×1.9     9.6×3.8
    12×11     7.5×4.5       8.8×6     8×1.4    9.5×2.2     7.5×1.7
  11.5×10.8   8.5×6.2       9.5×7     8.5×2    8.4×2.2     9.4×2.5
   12×11.3      9×7        11.1×2.2    9×3.5    8×2.5

DESCRIPTION OF THE LEAF.—Neither the description as given originally
(1787) by Walter nor those contained in our Manuals give any
intimation of such variability as actually occurs. Some of them are
as follows: Walter says “foliis oblongo-cordatis”; Wood, “ovate,
finally nearly orbicular, abruptly contracted at one end”; Gray,
“ovate, rarely subcordate, abruptly mucronate”; Britton, “ovate,
acute or cuspidate at the apex, sometimes cordate at the base.” I
would suggest the following as applicable to the Ohio specimens:
Leaves _mostly ovate, often broadly oval (occasionally broader than
long), sometimes oblong-ovate, varying to lanceolate or even linear;
the base mostly subcordate but often cordate or even cuneate; the
apex cuspidate to acute or sub-acuminate_.

SMILAX SPINULOSA.—Britton and Brown in the illustrated Flora, 1:440,
appends to the description of Smilax glauca the following paragraph:
“Smilax spinulosa J. E. Smith, is a form with numerous small prickles
on the lower part of the stem, and more elongated, sometimes
halberd-shaped leaves. It occurs in southern New York, but is not
well understood.” However Smilax spinulosa is given by these
authors as a synonym of Smilax glauca, which according to my judgment
is correct.

[Illustration:

  _Plate 4._

Fig. 1.]

[Illustration: Fig. 2.

KELLERMAN ON SMILAX.]

SMILAX SPINULOSA AN EXTREME FORM OF S. GLAUCA.—The material secured
recently fortunately clears up the case unless I misapprehend the
purport of the above quotation. The “more elongated leaves” spoken
of may find their counterpart in the figures on plate 4, and yet
there can be no question that they belong to Smilax glauca. The
twigs bearing them were in many cases found _attached to the same
underground stems_ that bore the broad leaves. Even at a glance the
identity of the specimens in the field could not be mistaken; all
their characters showed that they were really Smilax glauca. In
herbarium specimens that have been preserved every gradation may
be seen between the extremes shown in the plate. These specimens
also show in some cases underground stems that bear both leaves and
twigs with leaves of the broader form. As a rule in the cornfields
where the soil is not rich and crop-cultivation has been diligent
the narrower leaves (on shorter stems) are common. In richer
cornfields, and in meadows, especially if quite fertile, the short
stems are clothed with the broader leaves. Abundant evidence was
at hand to demonstrate that this form with “more elongated leaves”
(S. spinulosa) is directly connected with the form called S. glauca
by the taxonomists. Its peculiarities are doubtless referable to
the special environment; in no case could these apparently aberrant
specimens be called a specific or even varietal form.

  EXPLANATION OF PLATE 4.—Smilax glauca. Figure 1: Eight specimens of
  tubers reproduced from photographs and much reduced. Fig. 2. Twigs
  (1-6) bearing leaves of varying shapes also separate leaves (7-56)
  illustrating variation in shape and size.




MEETINGS OF THE BIOLOGICAL CLUB.


OCTOBER 1ST, 1900, BOTANICAL HALL.

This evening was spent in the giving of reports on work done during
the summer vacation. Osborn, Mills, Griggs, Tyler, Miss Dufour,
Schaffner and Hine gave reports. Seven names were proposed for
membership.

The motion by Professor Osborn to hold the meetings of the current
year in Biological Hall was carried.

Hine, Morse and Miss Dufour were appointed a nominating committee to
select officers for the year.


NOVEMBER 5TH, 1900.

Members assembled in Biological Hall. President Schaffner called the
meeting to order. Officers were elected as follows: Osborn president,
Tyler vice-president, Hine secretary.

Long, Wyman, Ball, Hambleton and Dunlap were elected to membership.

The retiring president, Professor Schaffner, gave the address of the
evening. He had for his subject “The Life History and Cytology of
Erythronium.”

Landacre and others took part in a discussion of the paper.

  J. H. S.




NEWS AND NOTES.


The tenth annual meeting of the Ohio State Academy of Science will be
held at the Ohio State University, Columbus, on December 26 and 27,
1900.

PETIOLES OF THE COTTONWOOD.—The leaves of the Cottonwood as well as
some other species of Populus have an interesting light relation. If
one looks at a vigorous shoot, the leaves are seen to be arranged
in the profile position around the stem. This is accomplished by
means of a very simple device. The petiole is much flattened next
to the blade and is quite flexible. The flattening is transverse
to the plane of the blade and on this account the leaf will assume
the vertical position, no difference in what way it is attached or
twisted. This adaptation is also responsible for the musical rustle
one hears when resting in the shade of the Cottonwood. The leaves
are very smooth and nearly alike on both sides. Because of these and
other adaptations, the Cottonwood is one of the most successful of
our semi-xerophytic trees and one of the last stragglers to be found
in the western part of the great plains.

  J. H. S.




Ohio State University

  Six distinct and independent Colleges, each
  with a Dean and Faculty of its own.

  THIRTY SEVEN DEPARTMENTS.
  THIRTY DISTINCT COURSES.

  AGRICULTURE, ARTS, LAW,
  ENGINEERING, PHARMACY,
  VETERINARY MEDICINE.


Superior facilities for education in Applied Science. Short or
special courses for mature students not candidates for degrees.

  One hundred and twenty one instructors. Over thirteen hundred
  students.

  FINEST GYMNASIUM IN THE WEST.

  _For further information address the President_,

  DR. W. O. THOMPSON, STATE UNIVERSITY, COLUMBUS.




Ohio Forest Trees Identified by Leaves and Fruit.

By W. A. KELLERMAN, PH. D., Ohio State University.


A neat pamphlet for every one who wishes to learn our native forest
trees. Keys simple. Description plain. Can learn the names of the
trees easily.

  Price reduced from 25 cents to       10 cents.

Also, =The Fourth State Catalogue of Ohio Plants=.

  Bound copies at cost of binding, namely       20 cents.

Gives list of scientific and common names; distribution by counties.

Teachers and others will also be interested in Prof. Kellerman’s
Phyto-theca or Herbarium Portfolio, _Practical Studies_ in Elementary
Botany, _Elementary Botany_ with Spring Flora, all published by
Eldredge & Bro., Philadelphia, to whom apply.

For information or copies of _Forest Trees_ and _Catalogue_ or names
of plant specimens of your region _address_

  W. A. KELLERMAN, COLUMBUS, OHIO




American Entomological Co.

1040 DE KALB AVENUE, BROOKLYN, N. Y.

Lepidoptera Price List No. 2.—_Price 5 cents_

Refunded to Buyers

ISSUED NOVEMBER 15th 1900.


  Dealers of all
  kinds of           _ENTOMOLOGICAL SUPPLIES_

  Manufacturers of the Original
  and Celebrated               SCHMITT INSECT BOXES.

  _Builders of INSECT CABINETS, ETC._




The Twentieth Century Text Books of Biology.


  PLANT RELATIONS, 12mo, cloth                      $1.10
  PLANT STRUCTURES, 12mo, cloth                      1.20
  PLANT STUDIES, 12mo, cloth                         1.20
  PLANTS, 12mo, cloth                                1.80
  ANALYTICAL KEY TO PLANTS, 12mo, flexible cloth      .75

All by JOHN MERLE COULTER, A. M., Ph. D., Head of Dept. of Botany,
University of Chicago.

  _They are already the preferred texts, and the reasons will be
  apparent on examination._


ANIMAL LIFE: A First Book of Zoology.

  By DAVID S. JORDAN, M. S., M. D., Ph. D., LL. D., President of the
  Leland Stanford Junior University, and VERNON L. KELLOGG, M. S.,
  Professor in Leland Stanford Junior University. 12mo. Cloth, $1.20.
  _Now ready._

  _Not a book for learning the classification, anatomy, and
  nomenclature of animals, but to show how animals reached their
  present development, the effects of environment, their place in
  Nature, their relations to one another and to the human race.
  Designed for one-half year’s work in high schools. Send for sample
  pages._


ANIMAL FORMS: A Second Book of Zoology.

By DAVID S. JORDAN, M. S., M. D., Ph. D., LL. D., and HAROLD HEATH,
Ph. D., Professor in Leland Stanford Junior University. _Ready in
February, 1901._


=D. APPLETON AND COMPANY, Publishers=, _New York_, _Chicago_,
_London_.




RECENT SCIENTIFIC WORKS


In =Astronomy=, Dr. Simon Newcomb’s new book, published October,
1900; in =Physics=, the Johns Hopkins text of Professors Rowland
and Ames; also in Physics for second and third year high school
work, the text of Dr. Hoadley, of Swarthmore; in =Physiology=, the
text by Drs. Macy and Norris, based on the Nervous System; also the
=High School Physiology= indorsed by the W. C. T. U., written by Dr.
Hewes, of Harvard University; in =Geology=, the =Revised “Compend”=
of Dr. Le Conte, and the two standard works of Dana,—The =Manual for
University Work=, and the =New Text Book=, revision and rewriting
of Dr. Rice, for fourth year high school work; in =Chemistry=, the
approved =Storer and Lindsay=, recommended for secondary schools by
the leading colleges; in =Zoology=, the =Laboratory Manual= of Dr.
Needham, of Cornell; and the Series “=Scientific Memoirs=” edited by
Dr. Ames, of Johns Hopkins. Nine volumes ready.

The publishers cordially invite correspondence.


AMERICAN BOOK COMPANY, CINCINNATI




  Transcriber’s Notes

  pg 15 Changed: Assciate Editors
             to: Associate Editors

  pg 18 Changed: catching the small crustacians
             to: catching the small crustaceans

  pg 28 Changed: J. S. H.
             to: J. H. S.

  pg 29 Changed: Entomological Suppies
             to: Entomological Supplies

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE O. S. U. NATURALIST, VOL
I., NO. 2, DECEMBER, 1900 ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

• You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation.”

• You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
  works.

• You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

• You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you “AS-IS”, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™'s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
